---
layout: post
author: "Mahdi Mohseni"
title: "Time Series Forecasting — Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS)"
date: 2025-04-23
tags: ["time_Series_Forecasting", 
"Continuous_Ranked_Probability_Score", 
"loss_function", 
"CRPS"
]
description: "Many forecasting models use least squares or its variants to minimize prediction errors, treating over- and under-predictions the same. But in practice, the stakes often differ — and single-point predictions don’t reveal how confident the model is. In this post, I turn to parametric models. These assume a specific distribution and predict its parameters directly. In my latest post, I walk through how this works and introduce CRPS — a loss function designed for training such probabilistic models."
draft: false
---


In time series forecasting, the least squares method or one of its variants is commonly used. These methods predict a single value, and the difference between this prediction and the actual value is treated as the error. In this setup, both over-prediction and under-prediction are equally penalized, proportional to their absolute values.

However, this type of modeling doesn’t tell us much about how confident the model is in its prediction. If we had a confidence interval around the predicted value, we could make more informed decisions — especially in real-world scenarios where underestimation or overestimation can have severe consequences.

In a previous post, I talked about quantile forecasting as a way to address this issue. Instead of predicting a single point, it estimates an interval for the target variable. I explained how quantile loss (also called pinball loss) helps define a confidence interval around predictions. I explained the non-parametric approach and how it doesn’t assume a specific distribution for the data.

Now, as promised, I’m turning to parametric modeling, where we assume a particular conditional distribution for the target variable and train the model to predict the parameters of that distribution.

In this post, I’ll explain how this works — and introduce a loss function for training such models: the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS).

[Read more ...](https://medium.com/@mohsenim/time-series-forecasting-continuous-ranked-probability-score-crps-ff5b8383d0e1)
